Latest Technology Innovations -IT
Remember the movie Chennai  vs China (Hindi) , the story about how the student tries to revive the ancestor’s genetic skills and find a cure for a virus .They found the target gene  and tried editing and triggering that gene sequence .Here is where the machine learning  evolving ,that is in Gene Therapy .
What is Gene Therapy?
Gene therapy is a technique that treats the disease and improves immunity by modifying, adding, deactivating, or replacing the genes within the human DNA. It can be administered both inside and outside the body, where viral vectors are used as vehicles to carry the new genetic material. Gene therapy on the other hand has proven to be highly effective against diseases as it targets the source or cause of the disease. 
What is the role of Machine Learning in gene therapy?
In spite of most advanced medical technologies, the success of gene therapy lies in ensuring the therapeutic gene is specifically targeted to the right cells and the right tissue. If poorly executed, gene therapy could potentially encourage harmful mutations in the DNA, resulting in bigger health problems for the patient.  The other obstacle is to tackle the vast amount of patient data that must be collected and analyzed.
A key solution to address all of the above challenges is genome sequencing, a technique that breaks down and sequences the various components of a DNA to better understand their function within the overall genetic code. 
This is where  ML  plays a vital role in interpreting genetic variations .  ML is one of the techniques used in Artificial Intelligence (AI) to produce automated intelligent behavior by using statistical data. It provides a learning opportunity from statistical data and performing actions based on the learning. By using ML, the analysis of enormous and complex data can be achieved in a faster and effective manner.
Supervised machine learning methods were recently used to discriminate between genomic regions experiencing purifying selection and those that did not have any selective constraint. This study discovered candidate regions of the genome that were highly enriched in the regulatory domains of genes that are important for the proper development of the central nervous system.The presence of the candidate regions near a gene can predict human-specific changes of expression in the brain.
AI and Machine Learning Applications in Gene Therapy
1 – Genome Sequencing
Whole Genome  Sequencing (WGS) has grown as an area of interest in medical diagnostics. Next Generation Sequencing has emerged as a buzzword which encompasses modern  DNA sequencing techniques, allowing researchers to sequence a whole human genome in one day as compared to the classic Sanger sequencing technology which required over a decade for completion when the human genome was first sequenced.
2 – Gene Editing
Gene editing is defined as a method of making specific alterations to DNA at the cellular or organism level. CRISPR is a gene editing technology that offers a faster and less expensive way of conducting gene editing. In order to use CRISPR, researchers must first select an appropriate  target sequence. This can be a daunting process involving many choices and unpredictable outcomes. Machine learning offers the capability to significantly reduce the time, cost and effort necessary to identify an appropriate target sequence.
3 – Clinical Workflow
There are often gaps in the patient data available to the different members of a healthcare team serving a patient. This challenge has sparked an interest in using machine learning to improve the efficiency of the clinical workflow process. Intel has designed an Analytics Toolkit which integrates machine learning capabilities into the clinical workflow process
4 – Direct-to-Consumer Genomics
Direct-to-consumer genomics is a rapidly growing industry and leading companies such as 23andMe and Ancestry.com are becoming household names. 23andMe recently combined data from 600,000 research participants with machine learning to develop a model for a Genetic Weight report. The report is designed to provide personalized analyses of how an individual’s genetic material may impact their weight.
Conclusion
Machine learning in genomics is currently impacting multiple touch points including how genetic research is conducted, how clinicians provide patient care and the accessibility of genomics to individuals interested in learning more about how their heredity may impact their health.
The success of gene therapy will mean fewer medicines, fewer visits to physicians over the lifetime of a patient, which in turn will improve the Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALY) post therapy. ML-assisted gene therapy promises to be a ray of hope for patients with rare genetic diseases who currently cannot be cured using existing drugs and treatments. 
